gmail-notify/SKILL.md, before:

---
name: gmail-notify
description: "Set up priority Gmail notifications via the webhook hook pipeline. Use when: user wants email alerts, wants to configure Gmail filtering, or asks about the Gmail webhook/hook."
metadata: { "openclaw": { "emoji": "📬" } }
---

# Gmail Priority Notifications

Sends Telegram notifications for priority emails using a pre-filter script (`gmail-filter.sh`) that queries Gmail via `gog` and only wakes the agent when there are matching emails.

## Architecture

```
Gmail push (Pub/Sub) → gog watch serve → /hooks/gmail → hook mapping → gmail-filter.sh → agent summarizes → Telegram
```

The hook mapping triggers `gmail-filter.sh`, which queries Gmail for priority unread emails. If there are matches, the agent summarizes them and delivers via Telegram. If not, the agent returns `NO_REPLY`.

## Setup

### 1. Set up the Gmail webhook base config (one-time)

Use OpenClaw's Gmail helper first. This creates the **webhook plumbing** and Gmail watch config, including:

- `hooks.enabled: true`
- `hooks.token` (used to authenticate `/hooks/*` requests)
- `hooks.presets: ["gmail"]` (or merged with existing presets)
- `hooks.gmail.*` (account/topic/subscription/push token/hook URL/serve settings)

Example:

```bash
openclaw webhooks gmail setup --account your-email@example.com
```

Then run the watcher service (usually alongside the gateway):

```bash
openclaw webhooks gmail run
```

This skill adds a **custom hook mapping** on top of that base config. Do not replace the `hooks` block with only `mappings`.

### 2. Ensure the filter script executable

```bash
chmod +x ~/.openclaw/workspace/skills/gmail-notify/gmail-filter.sh
```

### 3. Add the hook mapping to `openclaw.json` (merge, do not replace)

Add this mapping under `hooks.mappings` while preserving the existing `hooks.enabled`, `hooks.token`, `hooks.presets`, and `hooks.gmail` values created by `openclaw webhooks gmail setup`.

Example **shape** of the resulting `hooks` config (abbreviated):

```json
{
  "hooks": {
    "enabled": true,
    "path": "/hooks",
    "token": "YOUR_EXISTING_HOOK_TOKEN",
    "presets": ["gmail"],
    "gmail": {
      "account": "your-email@example.com",
      "topic": "projects/your-project/topics/gog-gmail-watch",
      "subscription": "gog-gmail-watch-push",
      "pushToken": "YOUR_EXISTING_PUSH_TOKEN",
      "hookUrl": "http://127.0.0.1:3000/hooks/gmail"
    },
    "mappings": [
      {
        "match": { "path": "gmail" },
        "action": "agent",
        "wakeMode": "now",
        "name": "Gmail Filter",
        "messageTemplate": "Gmail push received. Run the pre-filter script:\n\n```bash\nbash ~/.openclaw/workspace/skills/gmail-notify/gmail-filter.sh\n```\n\nIf exit code 1 (no output): reply EXACTLY with NO_REPLY\n\nIf JSON output: summarize each email for the user as a short Telegram message. For each email include:\n- **From** (person/org name, not the raw email)\n- **Subject**\n- **Summary** — 1-3 sentences covering the key content and any action items from the body\n\nKeep the overall message concise and scannable.",
        "deliver": true,
        "channel": "telegram",
        "thinking": "off"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

Notes:

- The Gmail helper writes most of the `hooks.gmail.*` values for you. Reuse those values.
- The webhook endpoint is typically `/hooks/gmail` (or `${hooks.path}/gmail` if you changed `hooks.path`).
- `/hooks/*` requests require the hook token in `Authorization: Bearer <token>` or `X-OpenClaw-Token` (not in the query string).
- If you want to force delivery to a specific Telegram chat, add `"to": "<chat-id>"` to the mapping.

### 4. Ensure required script environment variables are configured

`gmail-filter.sh` expects `gog` credentials to work non-interactively on the host running OpenClaw:

- `GOG_KEYRING_BACKEND`
- `GOG_KEYRING_PASSWORD`
- `GOG_ACCOUNT` (optional if you want the script default)

Set these in `openclaw.json` under `env.vars` (or otherwise ensure they are available to the process running the hook-triggered agent turn).

### 5. Verify

```bash
bash ~/.openclaw/workspace/skills/gmail-notify/gmail-filter.sh
```

- Exit code 0 + JSON output = matching emails found
- Exit code 1 + no output = nothing to report

After that, verify end-to-end by confirming:

- Gateway is running with hooks enabled
- `openclaw webhooks gmail run` is running
- Gmail push events reach `/hooks/gmail`
- The mapping triggers and delivers to Telegram

## Filter Criteria

The script queries for **unread** emails newer than the last checkpoint, matching ANY of:

1. **Primary inbox** — `in:inbox` excluding `category:promotions`, `category:updates`, `category:forums`
2. **label:Missionaries**
3. **label:"SPBC Prayer Chain"**
4. **Voice of the Martyrs** — `from:vom.org` or `from:persecution.com`

## Deduplication

The script tracks the last check time in `~/.openclaw/state/gmail-filter/last-check-epoch`. Each run:

1. Uses Gmail's `after:<epoch>` to only query emails newer than the last check.
2. Falls back to `newer_than:1h` on first run (no state file).
3. Serializes overlapping runs with a lock (prevents duplicate notifications when Gmail emits bursty push events).
4. Advances the checkpoint after each run using the max parseable message date, but never earlier than the run start time (or "now" if no matches).

To reset: `rm ~/.openclaw/state/gmail-filter/last-check-epoch`

## Script Output

`gmail-filter.sh` uses `gog gmail messages search --include-body` and returns JSON with `from`, `subject`, `date`, `labels`, and `body` (truncated to 3000 chars) per message.

### Customizing

Edit `gmail-filter.sh` in this skill directory. The filter query is in the `QUERY` variable. Environment variables:

| Variable | Default | Description |
|----------|---------|-------------|
| `GOG_ACCOUNT` | `brian.neradt@gmail.com` | Gmail account |
| `GMAIL_FILTER_MAX` | `10` | Max messages to return |
| `GMAIL_FILTER_MAX_BODY` | `3000` | Max body chars per message |
| `GMAIL_FILTER_WINDOW` | `1h` | Fallback window (only used when no state file exists) |

## When to Use

- User wants to set up or modify Gmail email notifications
- User wants to change which emails trigger notifications
- User asks about the Gmail webhook or hook pipeline

## When NOT to Use

- User wants to send/read email directly — use the `gog` skill
- User wants to set up Gmail webhook from scratch — use `openclaw webhooks gmail setup`

Commit message:

Deduplicate gmail filter by message signature

gmail-notify/SKILL.md, after:

---
name: gmail-notify
description: "Set up priority Gmail notifications via the webhook hook pipeline. Use when: user wants email alerts, wants to configure Gmail filtering, or asks about the Gmail webhook/hook."
metadata: { "openclaw": { "emoji": "📬" } }
---

# Gmail Priority Notifications

Sends Telegram notifications for priority emails using a pre-filter script (`gmail-filter.sh`) that queries Gmail via `gog` and only wakes the agent when there are matching emails.

## Architecture

```
Gmail push (Pub/Sub) → gog watch serve → /hooks/gmail → hook mapping → gmail-filter.sh → agent summarizes → Telegram
```

The hook mapping triggers `gmail-filter.sh`, which queries Gmail for priority unread emails. If there are matches, the agent summarizes them and delivers via Telegram. If not, the agent returns `NO_REPLY`.

## Setup

### 1. Set up the Gmail webhook base config (one-time)

Use OpenClaw's Gmail helper first. This creates the **webhook plumbing** and Gmail watch config, including:

- `hooks.enabled: true`
- `hooks.token` (used to authenticate `/hooks/*` requests)
- `hooks.presets: ["gmail"]` (or merged with existing presets)
- `hooks.gmail.*` (account/topic/subscription/push token/hook URL/serve settings)

Example:

```bash
openclaw webhooks gmail setup --account your-email@example.com
```

Then run the watcher service (usually alongside the gateway):

```bash
openclaw webhooks gmail run
```

This skill adds a **custom hook mapping** on top of that base config. Do not replace the `hooks` block with only `mappings`.

### 2. Ensure the filter script executable

```bash
chmod +x ~/.openclaw/workspace/skills/gmail-notify/gmail-filter.sh
```

### 3. Add the hook mapping to `openclaw.json` (merge, do not replace)

Add this mapping under `hooks.mappings` while preserving the existing `hooks.enabled`, `hooks.token`, `hooks.presets`, and `hooks.gmail` values created by `openclaw webhooks gmail setup`.

Example **shape** of the resulting `hooks` config (abbreviated):

```json
{
  "hooks": {
    "enabled": true,
    "path": "/hooks",
    "token": "YOUR_EXISTING_HOOK_TOKEN",
    "presets": ["gmail"],
    "gmail": {
      "account": "your-email@example.com",
      "topic": "projects/your-project/topics/gog-gmail-watch",
      "subscription": "gog-gmail-watch-push",
      "pushToken": "YOUR_EXISTING_PUSH_TOKEN",
      "hookUrl": "http://127.0.0.1:3000/hooks/gmail"
    },
    "mappings": [
      {
        "match": { "path": "gmail" },
        "action": "agent",
        "wakeMode": "now",
        "name": "Gmail Filter",
        "messageTemplate": "Gmail push received. Run the pre-filter script:\n\n```bash\nbash ~/.openclaw/workspace/skills/gmail-notify/gmail-filter.sh\n```\n\nIf exit code 1 (no output): reply EXACTLY with NO_REPLY\n\nIf JSON output: summarize each email for the user as a short Telegram message. For each email include:\n- **From** (person/org name, not the raw email)\n- **Subject**\n- **Summary** — 1-3 sentences covering the key content and any action items from the body\n\nKeep the overall message concise and scannable.",
        "deliver": true,
        "channel": "telegram",
        "thinking": "off"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

Notes:

- The Gmail helper writes most of the `hooks.gmail.*` values for you. Reuse those values.
- The webhook endpoint is typically `/hooks/gmail` (or `${hooks.path}/gmail` if you changed `hooks.path`).
- `/hooks/*` requests require the hook token in `Authorization: Bearer <token>` or `X-OpenClaw-Token` (not in the query string).
- If you want to force delivery to a specific Telegram chat, add `"to": "<chat-id>"` to the mapping.

### 4. Ensure required script environment variables are configured

`gmail-filter.sh` expects `gog` credentials to work non-interactively on the host running OpenClaw:

- `GOG_KEYRING_BACKEND`
- `GOG_KEYRING_PASSWORD`
- `GOG_ACCOUNT` (optional if you want the script default)

Set these in `openclaw.json` under `env.vars` (or otherwise ensure they are available to the process running the hook-triggered agent turn).

### 5. Verify

```bash
bash ~/.openclaw/workspace/skills/gmail-notify/gmail-filter.sh
```

- Exit code 0 + JSON output = matching emails found
- Exit code 1 + no output = nothing to report

After that, verify end-to-end by confirming:

- Gateway is running with hooks enabled
- `openclaw webhooks gmail run` is running
- Gmail push events reach `/hooks/gmail`
- The mapping triggers and delivers to Telegram

## Filter Criteria

The script queries for **unread** emails newer than the last checkpoint, matching ANY of:

1. **Primary inbox** — `in:inbox` excluding `category:promotions`, `category:updates`, `category:forums`
2. **label:Missionaries**
3. **label:"SPBC Prayer Chain"**
4. **Voice of the Martyrs** — `from:vom.org` or `from:persecution.com`

## Deduplication

The script tracks the last check time in `~/.openclaw/state/gmail-filter/last-check-epoch`. Each run:

1. Uses Gmail's `after:<epoch>` to only query emails newer than the last check.
2. Falls back to `newer_than:1h` on first run (no state file).
3. Serializes overlapping runs with a lock (prevents duplicate notifications when Gmail emits bursty push events).
4. Advances the checkpoint after each run using the max parseable message date, but never earlier than the run start time (or "now" if no matches).

To reset: `rm ~/.openclaw/state/gmail-filter/last-check-epoch`

If you also want to clear duplicate-suppression memory, remove:
`~/.openclaw/state/gmail-filter/seen-signatures.txt`

## Script Output

`gmail-filter.sh` uses `gog gmail messages search --include-body` and returns JSON with `from`, `subject`, `date`, `labels`, and `body` (truncated to 3000 chars) per message.

### Customizing

Edit `gmail-filter.sh` in this skill directory. The filter query is in the `QUERY` variable. Environment variables:

| Variable | Default | Description |
|----------|---------|-------------|
| `GOG_ACCOUNT` | `brian.neradt@gmail.com` | Gmail account |
| `GMAIL_FILTER_MAX` | `10` | Max messages to return |
| `GMAIL_FILTER_MAX_BODY` | `3000` | Max body chars per message |
| `GMAIL_FILTER_WINDOW` | `1h` | Fallback window (only used when no state file exists) |
| `GMAIL_FILTER_SEEN_MAX` | `500` | Number of recent message signatures kept for duplicate suppression |

## When to Use

- User wants to set up or modify Gmail email notifications
- User wants to change which emails trigger notifications
- User asks about the Gmail webhook or hook pipeline

## When NOT to Use

- User wants to send/read email directly — use the `gog` skill
- User wants to set up Gmail webhook from scratch — use `openclaw webhooks gmail setup`
